Space Story, number 1074. Four minutes, 30 seconds, coming in three, two, one.
On the 15th anniversary of Apollo 11, NASA presents The Space Story. May 25th,
1961. I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal
before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely
to the earth. 30 seconds and counting. Astronauts report it feels good. T-minus
25 seconds.
20 seconds and counting. T-minus 15 seconds. Guidance is internal. 12, 11,
10, 9. Ignition sequence start. 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. All engine running.
Liftoff. We have a liftoff. Eight years later, on July 16th, 1969, Apollo 11 was
hurled into space from NASA's Kennedy Space Center, carrying a crew of three,
astronauts Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Michael Collins. The great voyage to
the moon was underway. Roger, 11. We'll pass that on. And it certainly looks
like you're well on your way now.
Listen, uh... Tranquility Base here. The Eagle has landed. Roger, Tranquility.
We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We're
breathing again. Thanks a lot. On July 20th, people from around the world
watched as Apollo 11 commander Neil Armstrong took that historic first step onto
the lunar surface. One small step for man.
One giant leap for mankind.
Michael Collins was the command module pilot on Apollo 11. One effect, I think,
of the first lunar landing was to bring people of all nations closer together.
After the flight of Apollo 11, we three crew members took a very quick trip
around the world. We visited some 22 countries in slightly over a month's time.
And we noticed that everywhere we went, no matter what the country, no matter
what its politics, the people there seemed to identify very closely with us and
with the Apollo program. They felt part of humankind's first step out onto the
surface of another planet. And I think that flight of Apollo 11 did make the
world a little bit smaller and a little bit friendlier and did give it a feeling
of unity that had not existed before. The late Dr. Wernher von Braun, then
director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center. We knew vaguely that it could
be done. When you consider that a typical Saturn-Apollo flight to the moon
includes approximately six million parts, each of one must work. And the failure
of each of one can call disaster. And you are working in a new field of
technology. Everything is unprecedented. And yet you are working under a limited
budget. Against the hard time schedule. All is quiet on the moon right now, but
the legacy of Apollo is with us forever. Historian Dr. Arthur M. Schlesinger
summed it up this way. If historians 500 years from now looking back remember
the 20th century, it will be because the 20th century was where man first began
to break his terrestrial bonds and begin the exploration of space. And the
generation which is coming of age in the 60s will be the generation which began
as the last Earth-bound generation and saw in their own lifetimes the shift from
man as a creature of a single planet to man beginning an expiration of space.
NASA has presented the space story.
NASA special report number 236. 14 minutes 30 seconds coming in 3, 2, 1. This is
Apollo Saturn launch control. We passed the 6-minute mark in our countdown for
Apollo 11. Now 5 minutes 52 seconds. The date, July 1969. The scene, NASA's
Kennedy Space Center, Florida. It was July 16th. The morning was hot and clear.
Poised on the launch pad, 36 stories of rocket and spacecraft, the most powerful
machine ever devised by man, about to begin the first leg of a half-million-mile
round trip to the surface of the moon. Launch director Rocco Patrone now gives a
go for 5 minutes, 20 seconds. High on top of the Apollo 11 stack, inside the 12
-by-12-foot cone-shaped command module, three modern-day explorers, Armstrong,
Collins, and Aldrin, were completing final preparations and checkout for launch.
Their mission had evolved from the drawing boards to reality in slightly more
than 8 years' time. The assignment was clear. Land on the moon and return safely
to Earth.
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, presents a special 15th
anniversary report. The flight of Apollo 11, Eagle and Columbia revisited. As
the launch vehicle begins to build up, we're now hitting the 4-minute mark. 4
minutes and counting, we are go for Apollo 11. On that significant day in July,
as the world watched and waited for the now familiar sights and sounds of
ignition and liftoff, it was not difficult to find one's mind wandering back to
similar days of major milestones in man's brief space history, events which
charted the course for Apollo 11 and beyond. It was May 5, 1961, when this
country took its first tentative step into space for man. Astronaut Alan Shepard
was at the controls. 3, 2, 1, 0. Liftoff. All right, liftoff, and the clock has
started. Yes, sir, reading it loud and clear. This is Freedom 7. The fuel is go.
The clock had started for man in space. Later in that same month, May 25th to be
exact, a national goal was set forth. I believe that this nation should commit
itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the
moon and returning him safely to the earth.
In succeeding years, this goal was to be reinforced by a second president.
Fourth, we must assure our preeminence in the peaceful exploration of outer
space, focusing on an expedition to the moon in this decade. And broadened by a
third. As we explore the reaches of space, let us go to the new worlds together,
not as new worlds to be conquered, but as a new adventure to be shared. All
still go at this time. Neil Armstrong reported back when he received the... In
all, a total of 20 manned flights preceded this first moon landing attempt, each
adding in a step-by-step manner the knowledge and experience required for actual
lunar missions. Pioneering the Mercury era, Gus Grissom followed an astronaut
-shepherd suborbital path. Soon would come Earth orbit. Godspeed, John Glenn.
Six, five, four, three, three, two, one, zero. Roger. The clock is operating.
We're underway. Loud and clear. Roger. We're ready. Carpenter, Girard, and
Gordon Cooper followed John Glenn into orbit with Cooper closing out Project
Mercury with a new space duration record, 34 hours and 20 minutes inside his
Faith 7 capsule. It was now known for a fact that man could indeed survive and
operate effectively in the hostile environment of space. Meanwhile, the newest
manned flight program was Gemini. Roger. Roger. There goes the pitch. Roger
pitch. You're on your way, Molly Brown. Yeah, man. Gemini was the bridge between
Mercury and Apollo. It was in Gemini that man would work in space and maneuver
his craft to rendezvous with another. Gemini, 7 and 6, would you continue with
the description of your station keeping? Right now, 6 is about 10 feet above
until left of 7. We're just flying nose to nose, approximately 15 feet apart.
And later docked. Okay, Gemini 8, it looks good here from the ground. We're
showing tone rigid. Everything looks good from the docking. Okay, we're going to
cycle our stop on switch now. Roger. We're flight, we are down. And he's really
a smoothie. Oh, Roger. Hey, congratulations. This is real good. It was in Gemini
that man walked in space. Let me take a close-up picture there. You smeared up
my windshield, you dirty dog. Yeah. See how it's all smeared up there? Yeah. It
looks like there's a cone. Gemini astronauts remained aloft as long as 14 days
in their small craft. And it was in Gemini that pilots helped steer their
vehicle through re-entry. As the 10th and final Gemini mission successfully
splashed down in the Atlantic, the three-man Apollo program rolled into high
gear, only to be halted by the accident on launch pad 34. This tragedy, which
claimed the lives of astronauts Grissom, White, and Chaffee, resulted in a
renewed dedication on the part of the country's manned space team and a
painstaking redesign of the Apollo command module, as well as safety procedures
on the launch pad itself. In October 1968, the spacecraft was ready for its
manned shakedown flight. Apollo 7, Houston. Ready to copy. Roger. You're looking
real good, Wally, coming right down the line. On ring A, and she's a really nice
control system. Next would come an ambitious stride forward, a voyage to moon
orbit for the astronauts of Apollo 8. And from the crew of Apollo 8, we close
with good night, good luck, a merry Christmas, and God bless all of you, all of
you on the good Earth. Apollo 9 followed. It was an Earth-orbital full-dress
rehearsal for all components of the Apollo spacecraft, including the four-legged
lunar module. Spider, this is Houston. Could you give us high bit rate, please?
Roger, Houston. Spider, high bit rate. How do you read, Houston? I read your
five square and gumdrop. I'm copying you five. Bye-bye. Then, a second full
-dress rehearsal, this time in orbit around the moon itself, where Apollo 10
crew members inside their four-legged Snoopy descended to within ten miles of
the lunar surface. Oh, Houston, Houston, this is Snoopy. Right, Snoop, go ahead.
He's going. We is down among them, Charlie. Roger, I hear you weaving your way
up the freeway. Can you give me a post-burn report? Over. Yeah, as soon as I get
my breath. Apollo transfer is complete. We're on internal power with the launch
vehicle at this time. Forty seconds away from the Apollo 11. With the stage thus
set by Mercury, Gemini, and preceding Apollo missions, it was now time to put
all the experience, all the hardware, all of the know-how, put it all together,
and make it work for Apollo 11. From launch pad 39A at the John F. Kennedy Space
Center, astronauts Armstrong, Collins, and Aldrin were about to make their giant
leap toward fulfilling our national goal. This is how it happened. Nine.
Ignition sequence start. Six. Five. Four. Three. Two. One. Zero. All engine
running. Liftoff. We have a liftoff. 32 minutes past the hour. Liftoff on Apollo
11. Roger, we've got a roll program. Tower clear. Roger roll.
Apollo 11, this is Houston. You are confirmed go for orbit. Roger.
Apollo 11, this is Houston. Apollo 11, you are go for TLI. Over. Apollo 11,
thank you. Roger out.
Apollo 11, this is Houston. All your systems are looking good going around the
corner. We'll see you on the other side. Over. Roger. Everything looks okay up
here. Roger out. Roger. And we've had loss of signal as Apollo 11 goes behind
the moon.
Madrid AOS. Read you right clear, Houston. How are you? It was like, it was like
perfect.
Roger. Roger. Captain Columbia, reading you loud and clear. How many? Roger. Bye
-bye, Mike. How did he go? Over.
Listen, baby. Everything's gone just swimmingly. Beautiful. Great. We're
standing by for Eagle. Good Eagle. How do you read? Bye-bye, Eagle. We're
standing by for your burn report. Over. Roger. The burn was on time.
Eagle, Houston. We're in now. You're a go for PDI. Over. Roger. Understand.
We're a go. Same time. We're a go.
Eagle looking great. You're a go. Down two and a half. Picking up some dust.
Three feet. Two and a half down. Great shadow. Four forward. Four forward.
Drifting to the right a little. Ready? Down and a half. Thirty seconds.
Backlight.
Okay. Engine stop. ACA at a descent. Out of descent. Out of control. Both auto.
Decent engine command override off. Engine arm off. 413 is in.
We copy you down, Eagle. Houston.
Tranquility base here. The Eagle has landed. Roger. Tranquility. We copy you on
the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We're breathing again.
Thanks a lot.
I'm going to step off the land now. That's one small step for man.
One giant leap for mankind.
Beautiful view. Isn't that something? Magnificent sight out here. Magnificent
desolation.
Hello, Neil and Buzz. For every American, this has to be the proudest day of our
lives.
Tranquility base, Houston. Roger, go ahead. Roger. Our guidance recommendation
is pings, and you're cleared for takeoff. Roger. Roger, understand. We're number
one on the runway. Look at that. How beautiful. 26, 36 feet per second up. Very
true.
Hello, Apollo 11, Houston. How did it go? Over. Open up the ORL doors, Charlie.
Roger. We got you coming home.
Neil, Buzz, and Mike. I want you to know that I think I'm the luckiest man in
the world. And I say this not only because I have the honor to be president of
the United States, but particularly because I have the privilege of speaking for
so many and welcoming you back to Earth.
Listen, Tranquility base here. The Eagle has landed.
That's one small step for man. One giant leap for mankind. One giant
leap for mankind. He became in peace for all mankind. It has the crew member's
signature and signature of the presidents of the United States.
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, has presented a special
15th anniversary report. The flight of Apollo 11, Eagle and Columbia revisited.